PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS 2001 (S.I. No. 600 of 2001)
SCHEDULE 2 — EXEMPTED DEVELOPMENT
PART 1 — EXEMPTED DEVELOPMENT — GENERAL

CLASS 1 — Extension to a dwellinghouse

The extension of a dwellinghouse by construction of an extension to the rear of the dwellinghouse or by conversion of any garage, store, shed or other structure attached to the rear or side of the dwellinghouse.

Conditions and limitations:
(a) The floor area of any such extension shall not exceed 40 square metres.
(b) Where previously extended, the floor area of all extensions combined shall not exceed 40 square metres.
(c) The height of the walls of any such extension shall not exceed the height of the walls of the dwellinghouse.
(d) The extension shall not reduce private open space to the rear to less than 25 square metres.
(e) No window shall be provided in any wall that fronts onto a road.

CLASS 2 — Porch to a dwellinghouse

The construction of a porch outside any external door of a dwellinghouse.

Conditions and limitations:
(a) The floor area of the porch shall not exceed 2 square metres.
(b) The height shall not exceed 4 metres with a pitched roof or 3 metres otherwise.
(c) Any wall of the porch shall not be less than 2 metres from the boundary with a public road.

CLASS 3 — Garage or shed within curtilage of a dwellinghouse

The construction of a garage, store, shed or other similar structure within the curtilage of a dwellinghouse.

Conditions and limitations:
(a) Used only for a purpose incidental to the enjoyment of the dwellinghouse.
(b) The floor area shall not exceed 25 square metres.
(c) The height shall not exceed 4 metres with a pitched roof or 3 metres otherwise.
(d) Shall not be used for human habitation.
(e) Shall not be constructed forward of the front wall of the dwellinghouse.
(f) Shall not reduce private open space to the rear to less than 25 square metres.

CLASS 4 — Works to the front of a dwellinghouse

The carrying out of any works to the front of a dwellinghouse including the provision of a hard surface for parking.

Conditions and limitations:
(a) The works shall not include the construction of any wall, fence or other means of enclosure exceeding 1.2 metres in height adjacent to a public road.

CLASS 5 — Fences, walls and gates within curtilage of a dwellinghouse

The construction of a gate, gateway, railing, paling, fence, wall or other means of enclosure within the curtilage of a dwellinghouse.

Conditions and limitations:
(a) Height shall not exceed 1.2 metres adjacent to a road.
(b) Height shall not exceed 2 metres elsewhere.

CLASS 6 — Solar panels on a dwellinghouse (Class 20F as amended by S.I. No. 493 of 2022)

The installation of solar photovoltaic panels or solar thermal panels on a dwellinghouse.

Conditions and limitations:
(a) Panels shall not be erected on or forward of the front roof slope.
(b) Panels shall not extend beyond the existing roof profile by more than 15 centimetres.
(c) Total panel area shall not exceed 50 square metres.

CLASS 7 — Attic conversion in a dwellinghouse

The conversion of an attic space within a dwellinghouse for use as part of the dwellinghouse.

Conditions and limitations:
(a) No additional floor area shall be created above the existing roof line.
(b) Works shall not materially affect the external appearance of the dwellinghouse.

IMPORTANT NOTES:
These exemptions apply under S.I. No. 600 of 2001 as amended.
A Section 5 Declaration from your local planning authority provides formal written confirmation that specific works constitute exempted development.
These exemptions do NOT apply to protected structures.
Previous extensions count toward the 40 square metre Class 1 limit.
SOURCE: Planning and Development Regulations 2001, Schedule 2 Part 1, S.I. No. 600 of 2001.